this UCSD TV program is presented by
University of California television like
what you learn visit our website or
follow us on Facebook and Twitter to
keep up with the latest programs
[Music]
before I introduce the uh our guest
speaker tonight I just wanted to say
that last month The Wall Street Journal
ran a major article
entitled uh Gene breakthroughs spark a
revolution in cancer treatment and this
article goes on to describe
patients um who responded to T to the
new targeted therapies uh which home in
on the genetic abnormalities of the
tumors uh uh that are driving the
proliferation and growth of the tumor
cells and the
metastasis um and the next speaker in
the series uh will be relle krock who
will actually detail about how she
thinks we can win the war against cancer
on cancer with a more
personalized approach to therapy
but there are enormous regulatory social
um and reimbursement challenges that we
will discuss in this series in the
months ahead so there's lots of
excitement about how we may be able to
convert cancer from a disease that
metastasizes and kills you to a chronic
condition that you can live with that is
controlled by a cocktail of targeted
agents that are unique to the individual
tumor signat uh genomic
signature this in many ways is how AIDS
is controlled today with cocktail of
drugs that has converted a lethal
disease into a manageable
disease um in addition the genetic
abnormalities that we see in cancers has
led to a Resurgence in the control of
the Disease by the immune system which
can Target the proteins produced by
these genetic abnormalities because the
the proteins are abnormal the peptides
are abnormal and this and these result
from the genetic changes uh that result
in inside the cancer cell and the immune
system can recognize those so I agree
with the article that we are on the
brink of a major revolution in cancer
treatment especially when you consider
that in 2015 two years from now a
company here in San Diego alumina will
charge only $500 to sequence all 23,000
genes in in in a tumor
cell that's less than the charge for an
MRI and so I think it's easy to predict
that the practice of oncology will
dramatically change in the years ahead
starting in
2015 so now the question is do we have
the current cancer research
establishment with the current cancer
research establishment do we have do we
have the appropriate infrastructure and
the and what in terms of carrying out
what needs to be done and that is why
we've invited Clifton Leaf to speak to
us today we're so pleased that uh Clif
Leaf can will be kicking off our speaker
series and as Mary said and just to
correct you the series is entitled Mary
didn't say this overthrowing the Emperor
of all
maladies that's what this is all
about and uh based on of course am
muki's uh book titled the emper of all
maladies as Maria just said
um uh today's featured speaker Clifton
LEF is a renowned journalist um editor
author and a cancer survivor himself he
had Hodgkins disease hodkin lymphoma uh
when he was a younger man and uh I'm
sure and presume and I'm pretty sure
he's cured
today um but this experience with cancer
did sensitize him to the to looking at
the existing cancer research Enterprise
and the notion that it needs revamping
Clifton Leaf has a master's of Fine Arts
from Sarah Lawrence College so he's not
a physician I'm sure he'll be the first
to tell you that but he just published a
brand new book that just came out which
is titled truth in small doses why we
are losing the war on cancer and how to
win it in 2004 he jolted the cancer
research establishment with his cover
story on in Fortune
Magazine which was titled why we're
losing the war on cancer and after that
he decided to delve into this issue in
much more detail which led to the
publication of his book this year nearly
a decade later it should be noted that
this Fortune Magazine cover story um
earned Clifton Leaf the Henry loose
award for public service recently Cliff
has uh been a guest editor of the New
York Times uped section is and Sunday
review he served he has served as
executive editor of Fortune Magazine as
well as wall The Wall Street Journal
smart Money Magazine and I found a very
very interesting another Accolade that
he received that Cliff was invited to
give Grand rounds at the National Cancer
Institute I've given Grand rounds before
Grand rounds are reserved for Physicians
you don't have non-physicians giving
Grand rounds but Cliff Leaf was invited
to give Grand rounds at the Cancer
Institute after he wrote those that
article this was the only time in the
history of the National Cancer Institute
that a journalist was invited to give
Grand
rounds so um in 2006 Cliff Cliff was
honored with the Time Warner Time
Warner's highest recognition for
community service it's called the Andrew
High School award and now we are honored
uh to have him with us today so please
join me in welcoming Clifton Leaf who
will be will have provocative thoughts
I'm sure on the cancer research
Enterprise here in the United States and
ideas on how to make it better
Cliff it's really a pleasure to be here
and I I'll get right to a story as I
think this is an important
Story the year was
1957 Dennis parsons's Burkett the guy on
the left had been in Uganda for 10 years
most of that time in the rolling H city
of uh kalala which was the capital of
the buganda kingdom and and had become
the capital of the new British colony
there he was the chief surgeon of of one
of the three surgical Wards at the
mugala hospital but he was by no means a
great surgeon by his own estimation he
was a decent surgeon a bush surgeon
maybe he would have had more time for
Artistry if there weren't so many
patients but there was nothing but
patience especially in children parents
would bring their children with their
bodies bent from polio and wilted from
hunger and ulcerated from infection and
gouged out by animal bites there was no
shortage of plagues in Uganda or in East
Africa for that matter malaria sleeping
sickness onong fever
alaria yaws terrible terrible diseases
quor
cor and
for the first time when he was first in
Uganda in in a northern city called lra
he was responsible for a district that
was 7,000 miles have a quarter million
population and he would drive around in
this Ford pickup with no breaks and pull
into what were grandly called subd
dispensaries which were just huts and do
surgery after surgery in his first year
there he did about 600 surgeries he he
had
estimated he this would have been a
grueling pace for anybody for a for a
doctor just fresh out of medical school
but Burkett by then was 46 years old he
had three kids his wife pictured there
had been in and out of good health most
of that time she'd been ailing in in
Uganda and there was one other thing
what what was the one of oh yeah yeah he
was missing an eye so at the age of 11
in his Preparatory School outside in the
yard and Northern Ireland some boys had
been gotten into a fight and and poor
Burk had gotten caught in the melee and
someone threw a rocket and hit him in
his eyeglasses and the shards went into
his eye into his right eye and three
different surgeries later he was left
with a glass
eye so it had been a hard press to get
the British British medical research
Council to allow a oneeyed surgeon into
their ranks and but he was relent ESS he
was this wonderful FASTT talking
Irishman with a high-pitched voice and
he just great Lil and he would just push
talk and talk and talk until he got his
way often times and that was the case
with the medical research Council plus
they were desperately in need of
Surgeons as I just said well with his
one eye he definitely had lacked in
depth perception and yet there were some
things that the Irish surgeon could see
that no one else could see and yet
nothing nothing on Earth nothing he had
ever seen in Africa prepared him for
this the boy's name was Africa he was 5
years old and when his parents brought
him into the magalo
hospital Bera didn't didn't even know
how to react there were tumors in his
mandible and his maxela two separate
bones it was as if as it was if a a
forest f had leapt over a over a you
know Forest wall a
firewall the teeth had been pushed out
of their
Moorings he didn't know what this was
was it a fast growing cancer or what he
examined the boy he did some x-rays he
found that there were tumors in the rest
of his in his abdomen he didn't quite
know what to make of it but he also knew
there was nothing he could do it was
this there was no way to cut anything
out there were too many tumors he knew
the boy would die in a few days and the
boy dead burket was really struck he
took some photographs like he always did
he took photographs of everything he
would develop them in this
tub and so the next
day he thought about this and more and a
couple of weeks later he was giving
medical rounds in a town called lra
which about 60 Mi away this was the home
of the of of the great Nile River some
said he was looking out the window when
he saw another child very similar with
the same jaw tumors protruding he was
like could this be a new infectious
disease what was going on he' never seen
anything like that he had been 10 10
years in Uganda and had never seen
anything like it and now in a 3we span
was seeing two children two little boys
with identical seeming
tumors he ran outside and begged the mom
to take the boy with him back to the
hospital they drove him back in their
truck and they took x-rays again and saw
that there were tumors everywhere and he
photographed them sometimes his
daughters would go and look to see what
Daddy was cooking in the tub when he
would develop it and they were shocked
to find these images they just looked
unreal Burkett said where was this
coming from he started asking around has
anyone seen these tumors now the the
kalala the hospital the Malaga Hospital
in kalala had pretty good records but
the best records were in the mango
Hospital which had been started by
Albert Cook who was a missionary in 19
in I think 1897 or something and so he
went to the went to the uh to the mango
hospital and there in Albert Cook's
records that were in the basement he had
written about these jaw tumors and he
actually done some drawings and said
that sarcomas the jaw he thought they
were sarcomas were particularly common
in in ug Ugandan
children so here it was Albert Cook is
saying that these are common tumors and
and burket had never seen it before so
he thought well maybe these tumors had
manifest in some different way maybe you
know the way doctors had classified
tumors they would classify by where the
primary was so if it was in the eye they
might call it a retinol blastoma if it
was in the kidney a Wims tumor if it was
in
the it was a I'm sorry uh if it was in
the you know in the chest you know they
might call it something else and so and
so this this diagnostic framework had
had perhaps hidden had OB fiscated a
tumor that other people had
seen he asked around bur had always
asked everything he would he would ask
everybody everything and he said have
you seen this tumor have you seen this
tumor and he'd show his pictures now he
was armed with his pictures and sure
enough lots of lots of children were
showing up and he was photographing them
now he did a a series of of of of
conversations with local hospital uh
directors and doctors until finally he
had discovered that perhaps this tumor
was one of the most common childhood
cancers in Uganda and yet he had never
seen it so he jotted off sent off a
paper to the British uh Journal of
surgery a saroma involving the joys jaws
and African children and it got zero
reaction nobody really paid attention to
it it was just some guy saying that he
had found 38 patients with this sarome
of the jaw in a short in a short time
well berkin had decided Well maybe I'll
just send a questionnaire out so he
printed up 1,200 Flyers with three
photographs I'm sorry for these
disturbing images but three photographs
of children and he sent out that flyer
to every hospital and clinic in Africa
that he had he carefully compiled the
register of all the names and sent them
out in a applied for his first research
Grant
$15 that's how much it was and he was
very I'm sorry 15 lounds it was about
$40 and
um soon after about three years or so
answers would trickle in yeah I've seen
this tumor and so he would take little
push pins and put them on a map now now
Burkett had three maps in his office one
was of Uganda one was of East Africa and
one was of of all of of Africa and he
would put the different colored push
pins meaning that if there had been a
confirmed case or someone had suspected
a case and he put them in and he
couldn't afford to actually get colored
push pins so he hand painted mapping
pins himself um he was down to the petty
Frugal this guy um he was kind of like a
a a Sunday school teacher his kids used
to joke that he would take baths in an
inch full of water and and and complain
about the waste well after 3 years you
started to get a lot of pins on the
board and there was patterns emerging he
started to to to to break them down by
age and do a little distribution of the
disease trying to see any kind of
pattern no one under than two had gotten
the disease and between four and seven
it seemed to ramp up and then no one
over the age of 10 seemed to get this
horrible disease twice as many boys his
his girls got that but again these were
just sort of patterns he couldn't figure
out why there was this pattern so at one
point when he's asking all these
questions a man named George etley a
doctor from South Africa a young hot
shot 36y old guy had been giving Le
lectures Burk had shows him the pictures
and and Dr etley goes this tumor does
not happen in South Africa and uh stops
she's like well doesn't happen he said
it with absolute certainty perket goes
well hm if it doesn't happen in South
Africa I wonder where the edge is
so he thought what if he were to do a
biopsy but not do a traditional tumor
biopsy but a geographical biopsy instead
of sampling actual cells out of a out of
a tumor he would sample memories because
he figured even though he had sent his
questionnaire and even though he'd
gotten very good good response
epidemiology was pretty tough it was
hard to do by postal carrier he really
wanted to see if he could get people to
remember and if you talk to people if
you get right in front of them and you
ask them questions sometimes they
remember things that were important
including where the children had come
from because again there were in
hospitals everywhere in Africa so a lot
a lot of parents would would TR trundle
their kids in from hundreds of miles
away into hospitals so it was really
important he found out and he had sort
of had an a notion of what he wanted to
do before he had figured out how to do
it finally he decides
he's going to do this journey and he
calls his friend Ted Williams now Ted
was his oldest friend in Africa he was a
missionary doctor a great doctor um but
he had a skill for a doctor that few
people had which was he could change the
front end bearing while you were having
a a cup of coffee was very very great
mechanic and and that they did figured
out that they were going to go on this
long 10,000 mile journey through Africa
30 countries at they had 56 hospitals in
each case asking each um asking
everybody there whether they had ever
seen this tumor and so they started and
this is the journey you can see I don't
have a pointer but if you'll see this
little path on the right here oops and
this is where they went they started all
the way down to Johannesburg and came
back up the other
side um looking for any in this 10we
journey they had managed to find more
than 200
examples of these tumors and they were
emerging in a pattern like as if it was
a belt going across the belt seemed very
meaningful but they didn't know why
again it would happen in some countries
but not in others it would happen in
some elevations but not at others some
Villages but just just outside the
village not not in the others and so
when they were traveling uh he he wrote
this up tumor Savari in East Africa and
now he's starting to get some notice and
people more the more people hear about
the more people send them information
about this and the more people were
talking about it and as they were in the
car driving through these hot Dusty
Dusty paths they were like roads but
they weren't really roads they were like
first of all he had this a a a Ford
station wagon that had been brought up
by another missionary fleeing the Civil
War in Congo and it was it was a a 35
horsepower car with 45,000 mil on it and
often they would it was so dusty that if
they opened the window they would choke
on Dust if they closed it they would
bake sometimes there'd be these
torrential downpours that would wash out
a road and this is how they sat and
passed the time talking about these
things and at one point it was this
talking that was so important because if
they had flown to all these places they
would have missed it but in talking
someone had mentioned that well maybe
this isn't a pattern of geography maybe
it's a pattern of topography maybe
altitude has something to do with it and
sure enough there was this very
interesting relationship it wasn't just
altitude
though a Alexander had an anology was
also another Alexander hat was a famous
chemotherapist at the time but this guy
was an insect guy and he said you know
he's looking at this and it's like if
you look at this this pattern of where
the the the map of these diseases is is
any where where there was you know more
than 50 cm of rainfall a year and the
temperature rarely di below
60° that's really where you're seeing
this stuff so it's not just altitude but
it's also rain and whatnot and so they
looked at the this belt that seemed to
start about 15 to 18 degrees north of
the equator on the on the North side on
the bottom it was a little harder to
tell and when he was saying when when
Alexander had mentioned this he says you
know it kind of reminds me of a sleeping
sickness outbreak I remember seeing a
map and that that was carried by the
Titi fly somebody else suggested
theophiles mosquito in its infinite
payload and sure enough a map of malaria
in South in subsaharan Africa was really
a map of burkit lymphoma an
extraordinary finding that just would
never have been realized if they hadn't
put these pins down on paper now this
was only part of the puzzle in 196 1
berket had gone to London he used to
every couple of years he would go give
these crazy speeches in London talking
about these tropical illnesses that he
found one of them was you know
elephantiasis uh another was hydrael
which were these terrible diseases where
testicular sacks would fill up with with
fluid and sometimes you would talk about
these crazy things and so every once in
a while the bush surgeon would come and
there' be some interest he was scheduled
to give this talk in a giant Hall that
felt fit like 12200 people in it and 12
people showed up now the next day he had
to give another talk and it was a little
difficult for him to do it and um he
made a little joke about it and in his
high pitched Lil he started talking
about this this disease and one of the
guys that was there was this one named
Tony Epstein now Epstein didn't know why
he plucked the the flyer off the wall
but he did plucked it off and he came
and as he's listening 10 minutes into
the this conversation he says to himself
wait a minute lots of people have been
talking about cancers that Were Somehow
connected to viruses and there was all
this talk of tumor viruses ever since
pton Roose in
1911 had had discovered that a a a a
chicken fou a chicken cancer could be
passed from into into a into a from one
foul to another by taking this blood
from the infected tumor from the tumor
and grinding it up in a filter so that
no particle larger than a virus could
ever get through there and then and then
transmitting that that that uh cancer
and he had managed to do this to great a
claim and also great skepticism and ever
since then lots of people had been
trying to find these connections between
viruses and and cancer and it wasn't
that the virus that cancer worked like a
virus there were no like outbreaks even
in the same Village it was rare if one
more than one child got Burkin lymphoma
for example brothers and sisters of
people with burkets didn't get that and
caretakers didn't get it so it didn't
work like say polio or sleeping sickness
or or some other virus but there was
this way in which somehow that virus
transformed the cancer cell
and after the lecture B uh Epstein
invited burket to tea and he said would
it be okay if perhaps you sent me some
tumor samples berket said of course now
this was not an easy thing to do in the
early 1960s you had to go to freeze
first of all you had to get the the the
specimens and freeze them in these
either dry ice or wet ice quickly rush
it to the airport and there was one
flight a week and then that flight would
come over um you know the next morning
and Tony Epstein would be there at the
airport rushing it back to his lab and
this sample after sample were sent 24
tumor samples which he would look trying
to make a cell line out of these a a
cell line which you could take the
immortalized cancer cells and somehow
propagate them over time and it was very
very hard to
do
so in the 24th attempt in a in a group
of of of the there was a flight that had
been delayed and the and the package of
of tumors was in a cloudy mix of fluid
and he thought oh this is ruined
bacteria got in and this is over but he
looked at it under the electron
microscope and spied something
remarkable he spied this now later this
would be named Epstein bar virus um this
was the first time it had come out of a
burket uh lymphoma cell line and Tony
Epstein started more collaborations now
he was trying to find this he partnered
with uh with bird a chang and Ivon bar
at first but he needed other eyes so he
he contacted the henleys uh verer and
gertude Henley and at the Philadelphia
Hospital the chop and they were in
brought into this and Everett Coupe had
had introduced um them to to Burk it and
Eva and George Klein were were looking
at this in in a in a different way and
and the Partnerships were sprawling all
over the world lots of different virus
hunters and people interested in in the
Kolinski Institute and and and out all
across the United
States until finally they noticed that
well it was just in one cell after
another burkets they would find these
EBV positive Epstein bar positive cell
uh viral virus titer and they were in
the nucleus that was somehow meaningful
and they looked like they were clones of
each other but yet they were finding EBV
everywhere suddenly 90% of the
population seemed to have have
antibodies to evv so the question was
very few and and even malaria was
epidemic so question was how are these
two things working together and this was
a great mystery in the
1960s but how were they working together
these two viral co-actor a viral and a
parasitic co-actor how were they working
to transform a cancer cell and people
started talking about this like it was
the Rosetta Stone now you know about the
Rosetta Stone it was this Stone from the
I think the 2 Century BC where there
were three scripts and on the bottom was
uh was um ancient Greek Greek and then
demoic Egyptian and then hieroglyphs and
by translating the one bottom you could
decipher the second script the middle
script and by deciphering the middle
script you could could finally
understand what the boy pharoh was
saying and so this was the notion that
that burket's lymphoma and somehow these
connections with these other co-actors
were the Rosetta Stone and it was an
exciting time really but
burket was really interested in
something else he was interested in
curing these children now another
partnership started Joe burkel at the
Sloan KET Institute had been one of the
early chemotherapist and he had come
over and he started talking about
Methotrexate this amazing drug that
blocked the B vitamin folate from uh
from cancer cells from all cells
actually and so but cancer cells needed
them because they were furiously
dividing so by stopping this division it
was killing the cancer cells and so that
was a Race Against Time and so burket of
course begged and borrowed some and he
said how did you do it and he tried it
and at first he got a remission in a
child and then it came back he tried
cyclophosphamid phosphide he tried
everything there was essentially Begg
and baring now these were not clinical
trials I'm these these children were
dying in 3 to six weeks there was no
time to set up a clinical
trial and there was no culture about
setting up clinical trials in that time
I mean Sydney Farber had had started Ed
early in childhood leukemia and had had
really taken risks that today we would
put him in jail for and this was the
culture back then but right or wrong he
was doing it and he gave this child a a
cocktail of of of of poisons that's what
these cytotoxic drugs were and this is
what
happened amazing same child same child
now p pet Clifford another doctor
another partner learned some of these
techniques and tried it on 15
children and these children are all were
all cured of brecket lymphoma all
long-term remissions most of them all
cured it was
remarkable how quickly it had happened
from 1957 to
1966 this is that's the time frame I
just showed you 9 years the who what
when and where had been answered
and all that remained were the how and
the
why in the
next 16 years some Clues to the how had
happened so I remember I talked about
these two
co-actors the malaria and the EBV well
it turns out they worked together to do
something that was remarkable they they
caused a
translocation in in two chromosones so a
little bit of DNA from one chromosome
chromosome 8 swapped with chromosome
14 and this was a familiar process in
blood cancers lymphomas and leukemias
and we see it a lot we see it in in CML
uh the leukemia that GLE works so
remarkably against and people like Janet
Rowley in Chicago were working
feverishly to find these trans locations
and here uh Carlo cr's group had figured
out that when this little bit from eight
went to little bit of 14 they created a
monster protein called Mick and Mick was
an anene it was a it it sent the cell
into a a replicative loop and in fact
Mick has been studied enormously and and
it seems to have effects in all sorts of
aspects of the cell cycle but this is
what seemed to happen and so now people
were talking even more grandly about the
Rosetta Stone well what happened since
so there was this great great promise
well the 31 years since there's where we
are burkus lymphoma is only a little bit
better understood in these 31
years it's hard to say what happened
exactly sometimes diseases get excite
you know there's some excitement over it
and people rush in to study it but after
a while it got a little frustrating and
burket had moved on to study to talk
about fiber and other things in in in
diet and some of the other people had
died and moved on and and so they really
wasn't much discovered beyond that it's
still an incredibly common it's endemic
in Africa now there is a different kind
of burkets sporadic burkets that was
found also in AIDS patient um that that
AIDS patients seem to to develop but but
endemic burkets Loma EB endemic U
burkets um is still a plague in Africa
in some places I think one in one in
five cancer cases are there in Mala for
example I think it may as many as 4 and
10 there the cost even though most of
the drugs that we're used to treat are
40 or 50 or 60 years old in some cases
the cost at least these are 2001 figures
from one study is $2,800 for the typical
that's that's more than three times the
annual family income of the of the
patient of a person in in the Ivory
Coast and I'm sorry those are all the
figures and so the question is what
happened you know um what changed
between then and now and so I have spent
the past 10 years trying to figure that
out what's happened between then and now
and I I think that one of we can't talk
about a lot of them but maybe we let's
look at this because this is such a
great example of sharing of data so
let's talk about this issue of sharing
of data and I've made this little
terrible slide here I'm sorry my my uh
Artistry is so bad um I was frantically
doing this today because I knew I'd have
to hand over my uh my flash drive and
there's also you'll see a little nature
Journal bias here um but I just it was
so easy to find these kinds of stories
about you know scientists asking
themselves this isn't Cliff Leaf you
know some journalist you know muker
saying this the scientist themselves
saying why won't you people share this
is a very very different culture from
the one that Burkett had had had
imagined genuine Global collaboration
and I am not talking about what we
normally do here's what we normally do
so we have a slow motion collaborative
process in which people read each
other's papers or some of them so you
wait a long long time until something's
published and then you read it and what
we do is imagine if you will that it's a
giant jigsaw puzzle on a table and
rather than all these people sitting
around the same table working together
to figure out well look well let's put
this together in there they're taking
their own jigsaw and going back to their
room and studying that little jigsaw as
best they can and so that's what we have
here so these are data as of today in
PubMed um on this one type of cancer uh
Gene or protein depending on which
you're looking at
bcl2 um there are 44,000 published
papers on the Ross gene or protein K
Ross and and all sorts of the Ross rth
family and the Ross pathway 50 , 249
papers as of in PubMed ggf beta more
than 61,000
p53 the great tumor suppressor that is
implicated in half of cancers perhaps
nearly 69,000 papers have been published
now sir David Lane gave this great talk
at the Cold Spring lab a couple years
ago and he said you know imagine you
know that just conservatively that each
of these papers costs either taxpayers
or the institutions they're running on
them were people about $100,000 each
because that's really what you're
talking about that if you think about
the time and the grant money that goes
into these things about $100,000 so we'd
spent essentially $6.8 billion on
p53 and we still had a surprisingly
incomplete understanding of of its
workings and no effective p-53 based
therapies and you could say that about
all of these things and so the question
was did we need a different kind of
sharing
now I submit that we have unlearned some
of the lessons of the long Safari when
when burkit when Dennis berkin is
remembered he's mostly remembered for
this issue about fiber he talked a lot
about uh diet and and the relationship
between the human diet and and and
cancer development and that's a very
important lesson that he he he's known
for but but the long Safari we forget
about and so I think that he would would
ask
wwbd or what would burket do what would
burket ask now so what now and I'm just
going to end you end with just two
thoughts we need a culture makeover
that's what I think and that's and I
don't want to get into this specifics
about these things but I would like to
talk about two specific areas this
frenzy of
that's just steeped in the system and I
don't mean just that we should give
drugs willy-nilly to people but the way
we think about the science we do and the
way we the way Grant applications are
are are are designed almost to squeezey
the Innovation out of the process and I
write in depth about that in the book
and so I don't want to just Trot out a
bunch of Statistics but I think we have
to turn that into some medical urgency
to understand as burket did that people
are dying and that the burden of cancer
is getting heavier each year so when we
began this war in
1971 we had about
370,000 or so dying we now have $580,000
now we have a lot larger population 100
million more people in heart disease
though we see a different pattern so in
2010 there were actually
138,000 fewer deaths from heart disease
than there were in 1970 imagine that
138,000 fewer deaths even though we have
100 million more people in the world and
running to the Department of Motor
Vehicles and sitting through angry
meetings and and getting yelled at by
their bosses and and all these things
you would think would stress induce you
know um and watching Homeland you know
and yet fewer heart
attacks um same with stroke same with
virtually everything that you can look
at in terms of chronic diseases it's
it's ex stra except for diabetes um but
if you take everything other than cancer
and just look at the crude death rate
the crude death rate has fallen since in
the past four decades about everything
except cancer 24% but with cancer it's
actually gone up 14% crude death rate
now I submit that the problem is so big
that we've forgotten to be scared about
it we forgotten the urgency and that's
why it's good to see those images and um
with that I just leave you with this
hopeful note that I think we can do it I
think that we can change the culture and
hopefully more lives will be saved as a
result thank you all very
much now I know in the book Cliff you
you went into great detail about what
was what's broken in our uh cancer
research Enterprise if you will so and I
guess we're going to have to the
audience members are going to have to
buy the book and available to and read
about it but um there is a lot broken I
agree with you we stifle Innovation if
you have a great new idea it's hard to
get a grant the people who get grants
are the people who've already done the
experiment yeah and they know how it's
going to work out um so what can we do
to um is there anything that we can do
as people
to to to make the system work better
yeah I I think there's there's a lot we
can do I mean one of the the issues I
think is that you know when I first
started to write about these issues in
2004 I was amazed that the the biggest
sort of welcoming that I got in terms of
start not not necessarily agreement but
welcome let's start the conversation was
with people in the scientific Community
with researchers and doctors and people
who said listen I completely disagree
with you on X Y and Z but you got to
point on on a you know and let's talk
about that and I was just talking with
um with is with someone before um uh
from the Burnham and um we were talking
about John Mendelson who was uh you know
Great's a San dieg your right right
there you go now when I when the fir
when the piece first came out um there
was some circling in the wagons I'm not
going to name names but but John menson
wrote me this letter and it was again
it's like it was a detailed like 11 Page
Letter and you know each one about what
I've gotten wrong and this and that and
that and what I got and right and then
there was a conversation like let's
let's keep talking about this and he
came into New York and we talked about
it and we spent you know we've had these
conversation for basically 10 years and
uh the engagement I think has really
I've seen that from many people and so
my feeling is and I have seen little
changes along the way in terms of having
these kind of conversations so I think
just talking about it is useful great
listen I want to invite you all to ask
questions uh if you don't have questions
I'll continue to ask questions but if
you do have a question I want you to go
to the microphone on each side here and
identify yourself because you are being
televised and we want we want everybody
to know who you are and but I know who
this is is Dr Robert angler
oh thank you
very I wonder if the fact that we don't
share data in academic medicine has
something to do with the whole system of
academic medicine we get rewarded for
publishing papers ourselves that we get
credit for we get rewarded for getting
research grants that we have to be sure
no one else knows what's in our grant or
they're going to submit our new idea and
we we get academic promotion credit and
financial reward for those things and it
seems to me that
that's that would be very um very much
uh uh preventing people from sharing
information opening an exchange of ideas
get a new idea share it with everybody
and see if they can bounce something
back to you yeah uh all I can say is I'm
glad my wife isn't here because if she
was she would say why' you spend 10
years writing a book when you could just
say it that fast
um you know basically that's it that's
the problem right there our academic
system is is is built around this this
this dysfunction and um and so if you
imagine it as an economic system um in
which every
incentive is is supposed to create a
goal the incentives the day-to-day
incentives are misaligned with the goal
so if the aim is to collaborate the
incentive is to disc collaborate as you
said if the aim is to share the the the
incentive is is to hoard and so and to
be secretive and to patent aggressively
and to guard your your your little
corner of the pie so um so I think that
part of the challenge is for us to sort
of reimagine what the academic research
Enterprise looks like and um that's
that's where the hardest part of the
problem is um and I think we could have
a you know a long conversation about the
best way to do that but I agree there's
another issue that comes up from the
same root cause perhaps we're seeing an
enormous amount of fraud in science yeah
and I think the same root cause is there
is that people have to get those papers
published and so they are fudging and
it's it's a there's an academic uh I
want to say it's almost an epidemic of
that going on as well I think they're
both the same root cause yeah I do I I
agree that's thank you Bob um I'm going
to ask you a question Cliff uh the um
some people have said that they read
your paper and your article and I
remember when it came out myself I it
was really quite surprised me but it was
very very interesting and people have
read that nearly 10 years ago and they
read your book today and people say well
nothing really has changed you've
implied that you inferred that today but
let me ask you this we're now in this
era of genomic medicine post some people
call Post genomic medicine um aren't we
winning don't you think we're winning a
few more B we may not be winning the war
what about aren't we winning more
battles it's it's a really good question
and you know I think that we are winning
a lot of scientific battles and so the
question is is this a problem of science
um now that seems like a crazy thing to
say you know cancer is a is a complex
biologic iCal puzzle and we're filled
with a room full of scientists and and
we're going at it in a scientific way
but the other challenge that we have is
that we have a disease that is also a
burden and so if you think of what the
elements of the burden are more people
are getting the disease and a lot of
those people we're overdiagnosing and
overtreating because we can't
distinguish between those diseases that
will truly progress and be aggressive
and those that won't and we're also
getting more people who are dying and
spending any more money treating them
and so to some extent we're having an
incremental gain but I worry about the
model about creating the sort of
paradise of chronic disease uh in which
things are managed because it's very
very expensive and it's very very
difficult to come up with the targeted
medicines that will be unique to each
person's cancer I mean if you talk about
the vast heterogenity of this disease
and bird Vogal has a new paper out or
recently just detailing that um it's
staggering and so I I worry that in some
ways we have some scientific
breakthroughs that becomes like a
one-armed Bandit where you win a little
bit with the slot machine and you see
you start to get some currency back and
you say oh this is the strategy I worry
that it's going to get us further into
the to a rising burden of cancer so as I
mentioned Cliff uh a couple years from
now you know I think every patient's
cancer will be sequenced yeah I mean we
got a company right here for 500 bucks
Jay Flatley the CEO of Aluma say we're
going to do all 23,000 jees and there
one of our future speakers is going to
be here Patrick suong he's going to tell
you I can and I've just heard him speak
I'm going to give you the data on the on
the on the on the genes in in uh what
did he say eight one day right so let's
say you have all of these let's say you
have all of these genetic perturbations
that you can find out and you can find
all the driver mutations and there's
still quite a few passenger mutations so
so identify them you'd have to find the
targeted medicine for each one of these
and the problem is that like viruses
tumors evolve very quickly because you
have these destabilized genomes in which
all the breaks kind of go and so the
more these the more broken these tumors
are I mean if you look at most
pancreatic tumors it's like a bomb went
off in there the genetic mutations in
there and so I worry that it's going to
be very very difficult if we're getting
at this at the cancers too late now if
we get cancers earlier if we can find
biomarkers the markers of these little
warning beacons of of of pre neoplastic
lesions or very very early disease then
maybe this targeted approach will will
bear FR so you you can can you envision
a a a time maybe it's 20 30 40 years
from now in which you'll have hundreds
of green Gene cancer Gene targets and
hundreds of specific drugs against them
and that will just match the patient I
to the genetic aimal you can't can you
conce that I you know I can't really
even conceive of what I'm doing next
week so uh so let's let's leave let's
leave it I'm I'm hope I'm optimistic
okay hello Frank Brun yeah uh I'm a
writer for br Journal of world affairs
in relation to this question of
collaboration isn't this situation right
for a company like Google in fact I know
they're starting a company called Calico
I mean analysis and collaboration of big
data I mean is that is that so I've I've
already mentioned my grand rounds and
and my grand rounds was uh making the
case that Google was epidemiology it was
the greatest example of epidemiology
because and what it was was a
frictionless wound because there was no
barrier to entry and it was just a
tremendous amount of data and in fact
they have used Google to identify flu uh
outbreaks before it's happened and
they're probably going to do a similar
approach with Calico so yeah I I I think
that there the beautiful thing about
this sort of creative destruction I know
Israel had mentioned that phrase before
is um is that you don't know where the
next thing is coming from the great sort
of because it by its very Nature by its
definition it does uh explode your your
your your understanding of what the of
the what the ground looks like and so I
hope so yes let's go over on this side
and
youy yourself I'm Betty Grizzle I work
for Department of interior currently for
load you haven't heard the news um sorry
yeah I actually just also finished a
clinical research degree here at UCSD
and that was eyee opening for me coming
from a different field
but this issue of collaboration doesn't
just happen in medicine it happens in my
agency and other agencies as well it's I
think it's pervasive um but my question
to you is more about prevention and how
you see the collaboration working to
solve the prevention uh Gap I would call
it that yeah this is the the great $64
question I say $64 question because
that's about what we spend on cancer
prevention um if you look at the current
budget and I hate to do things as
obvious as this because they they don't
the the rubrics don't break down neatly
but the by the nci's own estimate we
spent about 7% on and on on just
prevention now they used to break it
down differently and stopped doing the
breakdown which included cancer control
which is a huge part of of identifying
cancer uh you know and keeping trabs of
it um for the most part if you look at
uh where we have made strides and every
other uh Public Health concern it's
through preemption which is a a slightly
it's a take a different Nuance with the
prevention where we go in there um and
we intervene early in the disease
process so this is really important to
me and I think it's a great question if
you think about heart disease no one
thinks about heart disease as you go to
a a golf course and you Dro of a heart
attack and then the doctor says oh look
he just had heart disease it's it's a
long process we understand that and
we've understood that since the 1950s
and what we do is fortunately we have
good markers for identifying a
progression but 50 years ago we didn't
know that those markers uh were as uh as
in sync with the outcome as we do now
but so high cholesterol hypertension C
reactive protein inflammatory other
indicators and what we do is we treat
those things and we we treat them ahead
of time because we identify the
precursor as a essentially a disease
State now we don't do that with cancer
we still have a culture a mindset if you
will that says cancer begins at the
diagnosis we know it's not true we know
it's not true intellectually and
scientifically but that's where the
whole clock starts with survival it's
where the drug uh the the drug
intervention Pro part of the issue
starts and we really do think of and so
there's no effort to really identify the
sort of disease State even though we
know intellectually uh scientifically
that that in many cases this is a
process that's sometimes years or
decades underway and so I think
fundamentally we have to to attack on
prevention Behavior changes anti-smoking
campaigns we have to start thinking
about preemption about if we're going to
have this sort of chronic disease uh
intervention I think we're going to have
to start to think about how we approach
that so great question um Carrie yes
Carrie dance um I'm an engineer by
training but I've spent the last 12
years funding biotech yeah uh and I can
say to the last part of your slide
urgency yeah we need some real urgency
in the system right now you're stuck in
a system where all right we got a new
drug or we got a new pathway let's go
trial it takes you years just to get the
everything in place then you do one
trial you might spend 3 to 5 years you
get to the end gee it didn't work right
oh but if we just done this or that we
need to start moving more to
translational medicine which everybody
talks about but you can count on one
hand the amount of real translational
medicine going on in this town which is
a a Forefront we've got to get
doctors like Iver to say look I've got a
patient and that's what happened with
your patients there you had a bunch of
kids and somebody tried them and worked
to start trying you'll find patience are
very happy to do it to get in
translational try different things but
our system is structured oh no you can't
do that oh the IRB will worry about it
the FDA won't allow it in fact you can
if you're doctors you can do it we need
more people to start trying these
because the complexity of what you're
dealing with is so bad that I don't care
how much you know about Pathways and
everything until you go into real humans
you don't know what's going to happen
right okay we have to wrap up I just
want to End by saying Cliff the you know
when I look back at the history of all
this in the first 50 years we the number
one Mor cause of mortality was
infectious disease people died of
tuberculosis syphus whatever then it was
cardiovascular disease it's no longer
the major cause of death now it's cancer
do you not see over the next 50 years
that cancer will not be the major cause
of death well let's say I hope so so
you're optimistic sure more optimistic
than pessimistic yeah I'm always more
optimistic than pessimistic glass is
half full well I I even though I uh read
the book the entire book and I walked
away oh I don't he just get it right I
think it's more in common that we have
than differences so thank you very much
Cliff thank you very much you
[Music]